This is Voyager 1, the most distant
humanmade object in space. And it was
launched on September the 5th, 1977. And
after flying past Jupiter and Saturn, it
continued out into deep space at 62,000
kmh. And on November this year in 2026,
it will reach a distance of 26 million
km away from Earth or one light day. I
think it's amazing it's still working.
It's such a successful space mission and
it made me really want to know where it
is in the night sky. So, this is a map
of the entire night sky divided into
regions based on the constellations. And
Voyager 1 is exactly here. And although
we can't see it with our eyes, I think
it's nice to know where it is flying off
into deep space. And this made me get
kind of curious about where everything
else is. the first supernova we
discovered. Where's that? Or the first
gravitational waves or the first black
holes that we saw. So that's what this
video is. By the end of this video,
you'll know all the most interesting
discoveries that have led to our current
understanding of space and where they
all are in the night sky.
The first galaxy we discovered outside
our own was the Andromeda galaxy here in
the Andromeda constellation. And this
discovery is interesting because this is
visible to the naked eye. So people
would have been able to see this galaxy
from from whenever people started
looking up into the night sky. But
knowing it's a galaxy and even knowing
what a galaxy is is a whole another
thing because galaxies look kind of like
fuzzy clouds, kind of like nebula, but
nebula are clouds of gas within our
galaxy. So they're a lot closer than
galaxies like Andromeda which are like
far outside of our galaxy. So figuring
out this difference took some ingenious
astrophysics from an American astronomer
Henrietta Swan Levit who discovered how
to measure distances in space using
these stars called sephid variable
stars. So these stars are special
because they pulsate their size and
their temperature oscillates over many
days. But importantly, there's a very
strong relationship between the
luminosity of the star and the time
between the pulses. So all sephid
variable stars with the same pulse time
have got the exact same luminosity.
And this property means that if you see
two sephid variable stars with the same
pulse rate, but one's very bright and
the other one's very dim, this means
that the bright one is close to you and
the dim one's very far away. So Levit
studied thousands of variable stars in
the melanic clouds down here in the
southern hemisphere and she compared
them to close-up sephids that we already
knew about. We already knew a load
existed. So in this way sephid variables
became the standard candles and a way to
measure galactic distances and that's
how we discovered that there were
galaxies outside our own. By looking at
the sephid variable stars within those
galaxies, we knew that those sephiid
variables and the galaxies therein are
very far away. So this is the first
spiral galaxy to be classified. This is
the whirlpool galaxy M51. And I wanted
to show this just because it looks so
cool. We're very lucky that it's facing
us so we can see it from the top down.
It's a classic image of a galaxy. And
also the first sephid variable star to
be discovered was delta sephi over here
in the sephius constellation which was
discovered in 1784 by the astronomer
John Goodrich. And it's amazing to think
that if it weren't for sephid variable
stars we simply wouldn't know how far
away things are in space. I mean close
up to us we can tell the distances to
stars by their parallax. Basically, we
can compare the sky from when the
earth's on one side of the sun to the
other side of the sun, which gives us
kind of two images, which gives us a
kind of 3D view of the sky. But that
only works out to about 10,000 light
years. Beyond that, we rely on the
sephid variables. But they also run out
when they get too dim. And then we need
supernova.
A supernova, as you probably know, is
when a very large star runs out of fuel
and then explodes rather dramatically.
The first supernova we ever saw was
recorded by Chinese astronomers as a
guest star way back in the year 185 and
was visible to the naked eye for about 8
months. This was over here in the
centurus constellation. And today in
this place we see a supernova remnant
which is very likely to be the leftovers
from this event. Throughout history
there have been eight supernova that
have been recorded that have been
visible to the naked eye. And this one
in 1006 was likely to be the brightest
stellar event that's ever been recorded.
16 times the brightness of Venus. And it
was even visible in the day and it left
behind this remnant. But for me, I think
the most exciting supernova was in 1572
observed by Taiko Brahhe because this
one was a type 1A supernova. And type 1a
supernova are incredibly important
because these always have the same peak
luminosity and so can be used to gauge
distances just like sephid variable
stars. But these type 1A supernova are
much brighter and so can be seen from
much further away allowing us to measure
distances out to very distant galaxies
which we can't do with the sephid
variables because they get too dim. We
see supernova all through the universe
but we haven't had a confirmed supernova
go off in our galaxy since604.
So lots of people are looking for the
next supernova candidate within our
galaxy. A lot of people say Beetlejuice,
a red super giant in the star Orion
here, is about to explode, which if it
did, would be brighter than the moon.
But in reality, it's unlikely to go
supernova within our lifetimes,
unfortunately. A much better candidate
is Cararane over here in the Karina
constellation because it's much later in
its stellar evolution. It's more likely
to explode. But the trouble is, we might
have to wait millions of years for
either of them to go supernova. And it's
more likely that a supernova will
surprise us from somewhere else in our
galaxy. Now, there's one last thing I
want to say about type 1A supernova
because they were used to measure the
expansion of the universe, which is a
really important result in astrophysics.
Basically, because the universe is
expanding in every direction, the
further away something is from us, the
more its light gets stretched out as it
travels to us. This is called a red
shift. And by measuring the red shifts
of distant type 1A supernova and
comparing them with their brightnesses,
because we know their luminosity is
fixed, researchers discovered in 1998
that the expansion of the universe was
accelerating, which is exactly the
opposite of what they're expecting.
They're expecting that the universe was
going to slow down because gravity was
pulling it back. No, it's expanding and
accelerating. So, this means that
there's some force or energy out there
making the universe expand faster and
faster over time. We don't know what
this is, but we called it dark energy.
And this is another incredible discovery
thanks to type 1A supernova. By the way,
we've now met all of the elements of a
thing called the cosmic distance ladder.
Parallax, sephid variables, type 1A
supernova, and red shift. This is the
backbone of what allows us to measure
things from our earth to close to the
edge of the universe.
Dark matter is another mystery unrelated
to dark energy even though they've got
similar names. For dark matter, I want
to go over here to the bullet cluster in
the constellation Karina because here
we've got the best evidence for the
existence of dark matter. Dark matter is
some kind of matter. We don't know what
it is, but we know it's got mass. It
doesn't give off light or interact in
any other way. So, we can't see it. But
our model of galaxies needs dark matter
to exist to keep the galaxies together.
When we look at a galaxy, we don't see
enough matter. We don't see enough stuff
there to have enough gravity to keep the
galaxies together and stop all the stars
just flying away and the galaxies
falling apart. Galaxies aren't falling
apart, so there must be some other
matter there. And we call this dark
matter. But because dark matter tends to
clump around normal matter, it's been
difficult to know if dark matter is
actually a thing like a particle or if
it's just an error with how we think
gravity works over large distances. So
this is where the bullet cluster comes
in. So what we're seeing here is the
collision of two galaxy clusters. And
because of the collision, the gas and
the stars and the dark matter are all
behaving differently in this collision.
And because of this, we can see that the
dark matter is moving through this
collision unimpeded without slowing
down. But the bulk of the normal matter
in the gas, it is slowing down because
of the resistance of some friction. So
we can see that the dark matter is
actually its own thing separate from the
normal matter. And this is a key piece
of evidence to suggest dark matter is
actually a particle rather than just our
misunderstanding of gravity. And as
there's about five times more dark
matter in the universe than visible
matter, this is a super important
evidence to try and figure out what dark
matter is. Oh, by the way, if you'd like
to get hold of this poster of all the
constellations, you can get it at this
link or go to dosmaps.com where I have
all of my posters. And I covered all of
these constellations in my last video.
So check that out too.
Over here in the tale of Hydra, we have
the spot where on the 17th of August
2017, scientists discovered the first
gravitational wave signal that was also
definitively correlated with a burst of
light. These gravitational waves were
caused by the murder of two neutron
stars spinning into each other and were
detected by the LIGO and Virgo
detectors. Now, I wanted to put the
location of the very first gravitational
wave detection ever. Uh, but I couldn't
pinpoint it because we don't know
exactly where it came from. It was a
merger of two black holes. So, it didn't
give off any light. But because this
signal here was the merger of two
neutron stars, it also gave off a flash
of light, which meant we could then
pinpoint exactly where it came from. In
fact, as of making this video, this is
still the only gravitational wave
detection where we know exactly where it
came from, exactly where the collision
of those neutron stars was. Now, over
here in the Virgo constellation, we have
the first direct image of a black hole
released on April 10th, 2019. And this
is a super massive black hole at the
heart of the galaxy Messier 87. And this
image was created by stitching together
data from a global network of eight
radio telescopes that made a virtual
telescope the size of the Earth called
the Event Horizon Telescope, which is a
mad experiment.
And then for those of you who've ever
wondered where the center of our Milky
Way galaxy is, it's over here in
Sagittarius. And in 2022, this event
horizon telescope also captured an image
of the super massive black hole at the
center of our galaxy. And we think
there's a super massive black hole in
the center of every single galaxy in the
universe. In fact, when matter falls
into a super massive black hole, they
can create these extremely high energy
jets of particles called quazars, which
are extremely bright and luminous. And
the first quazar ever discovered was in
1963.
And that was here in the Virgo
constellation. And this was also the
first evidence that super massive black
holes even existed.
Over here in the vulpular region, we saw
the LGM1 signal. This was a signal
picked up in 1967 by Cambridge PhD
student Joselyn Bell Bernell. And this
was the discovery of the very first
pulsar, which he jokingly nicknamed the
little green man signal because it was
such a regular repeating bleep. Pulsars
are basically rapidly spinning neutron
stars. And this repeating signal came
from a jet of radio waves that the
neutron star was beaming out kind of
like a cosmic lighthouse repeating every
1.33 seconds. This discovery was awarded
the Nobel Prize in 1974. Although
controversially Joselyn Benel Bernell
wasn't one of the recipients.
Now over here in the constellation Tuca,
which is near the small melanic cloud,
we discovered the first fast radio
burst. These are signals from deep
space, which we don't really understand
yet. They were found in 2007, and then
since then, we've discovered many more
of these short bursts of radio waves
that have been detected all over the
sky. And the process that causes these
fast radio bursts is still a mystery. It
must be something high energy.
Astronomers estimate that the average
fast radio burst releases as much energy
in a millisecond as the sun puts out in
three days, but we still don't quite
know what causes them.
Now, I definitely wanted to cover nebula
because some of the most famous images
from space are of nebula. So, here is
the Crab Nebula. It looks amazing. This
is the remnant of a supernova that
exploded in 1054. They were really
spoiled with supernova back then. It
also looks amazing at different
wavelengths as you can see here. This is
looking at different wavelengths of
light. Uh over here is the Orion Nebula
and this is visible to the naked eye and
this is also a area of active star
formation which makes it very
interesting for astronomers to look at.
Here's the Lagoon Nebula M8 in
Sagittarius. And this is another star
forming region that's just about visible
to the naked eye, but it needs to be a
very dark, very dark sky. Here's the
Omega Nebula, M17, just visible to the
naked eye and has some amazing
formations in it. You've probably seen
this image before. So, this is where
this is from. And over here in the
Serpents Constellation, we've got the
Eagle Nebula, and this contains the
Pillars of Creation.
Okay, finally we have to talk about
I think the mapping of exoplanets over
the last couple of decades has been
absolutely amazing what we've been able
to find out. We now know of over 6,000
planets orbiting stars in our galaxy.
But the first two exoplanets discovered
were discovered in 1992 by Alexander
Volchan and Dale Frail. And these were
found because the star they were
orbiting was a neutron star, a pulsar, a
dead star. And they could infer the two
planets were there by the changing rates
of the pulses of the pulsar. But since
then, exoplanets have been found using
space telescopes, seeing the planets
cross in front of the stars, transient
planets. And we found many Earthlike
planets which are incredibly intriguing
to us because if there is life out there
beyond our solar system, these would be
the most likely places to look. Okay,
hopefully that gives you a big picture
of some of the most important
discoveries that have led to our
understanding of the cosmos. And I think
it's amazing we've been able to figure
out so much about the universe just by
observing and seeing patterns in the
data. Us humans are incredibly good at
finding patterns and structure. And if
you enjoy thinking this way, Brilliant
has many step-by-step interactive
lessons that train exactly that skill.
Breaking complex systems into
understandable patterns. Brilliant is a
fantastic place to learn maths and
coding like this course on coordinate
transforms or this course on coding with
Python. Both key knowledge for any
budding astronomer. You learn by
directly solving problems, which is
proven to be a lot more effective than
just watching videos. The lessons are
personalized and designed for any age
from 10-year-old kids to adults and have
been created by world-class teachers
from MIT, Harvard, and Stanford and
others. Practice is the best way to
learn anything. So, to learn for free on
Brilliant for a full 30 days, go to
brilliant.org/dos
or scan the QR code here or click on the
link in the description below. Also,
Brilliant has given viewers of this
channel 20% off an annual premium
subscription, which gives you unlimited
daily access to everything on Brilliant.
Okay, thanks again for watching
everyone, and let me know in the
comments what other map videos you'd
like to see in the future. No promises,
but I may well make them.